
 #published-research #chantelle-francis   #education #mental-health 
# Abstract
Mental health problems among children and young people in mainstream schools have been a cause for concern for some time and are also known to be prominent among children with SEN, who face exacerbated challenges in relation to their education. As such, a number of interventions are available for schools to utilise to tackle the challenge of mental health difficulties within the setting. Despite this, mental health difficulties within schools are increasing and should be identified at the earliest possible opportunity in order for interventions to have their optimum effect. Whilst there are a number of measurement tools available to measure general anxiety, depression, and well-being, no measurement tool exists that is based on factors directly linked to mental health within the educational context and is also inclusive to those with SEN. The overall aim of this thesis is to design and validate a new measure of SBMH with inclusivity to those with SEN.
Chapter One provides an insight into the area of mental health within mainstream schools in the UK. Chapter Two then systematically reviews the literature on the factors associated with SBMH. The results found that there are six main factors associated with SBMH: belonging and inclusion, relationships with teachers, academic attainment, socioeconomic status, whole-school approaches, and individual differences. Chapter Three then reports on qualitative data collected from pupils, parents, and teachers in relation to their views on SBMH, both pre- and post- the Covid-19 pandemic and associated school closures. This study found that social relationships and academic attainment are key contributors to SBMH. Chapter Four then explores the discussions between parents on an online forum in relation to schools in the UK, finding that parents often discuss topics falling under the following themes: individual differences and status, behavioural adversities, and relationships and environment.
Chapter Five focuses on the development of a new measurement tool for SBMH, which was designed based on literature and empirical findings in relation to both TD pupils and pupils with SEN. The chapter reports on the piloting of the tool and captures the opinions of relevant stakeholders, ultimately resulting in the Mental Health in Schools Questionnaire (MHISQ) being developed for validation in mainstream primary and secondary schools in the UK. The chapter finalises with a report 7 on the psychometric properties of the tool. Chapter Six then considers the findings of this thesis in the context of the wider literature and considers implications for practice and future areas for research. 
Overall, this thesis makes a significant, novel contribution to the literature by identifying school-based factors of mental health and creating the first-known measurement tool for SBMH, inclusive of TD pupils and pupils with SEN. The measurement tool is based on a substantial body of literature, as well as the perspectives of potential stakeholders.
#### Reference
[[https://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/id/eprint/51686/1/francis.chantelle_phd%2815009182%29.pdf]]

